Add release notes for 0.294 (#25633)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.294.rst

* Add an optimizer to add distinct aggregation on build side of semi join. `#25238 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25238>`_
* Add changes to populate data source metadata to support combined lineage tracking. `#25127 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25127>`_
* Add mixed case support for schema and table names. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add property ``native_query_memory_reclaimer_priority``  which controls which queries are killed first when a worker is running low on memory. Higher value means lower priority to be consistent with velox memory reclaimer's convention. `#25325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25325>`_
* Add pushdownSubfieldArgIndex parameter to ComplexTypeFunctionDescriptor for subfield optimization during query planning. `#25175 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25175>`_
* Add xxhash64 override with seed argument. `#25521 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25521>`_
* Adds aggregation tests from ``presto-tests`` to run with native query runner in ``presto-native-tests``. `#24809 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24809>`_

> * Move UnnestNode to SPI, make it available in collector optimizer. `#25317 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25317>`_

Reviewer: This entry does not begin with a keyword in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines. I'd like this revised to follow that list. Ideally I ask that this be revised to explain to an end user of Presto, as described in [Audience](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#audience).

* Replace ``EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)`` with ``EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)`` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_
* Update thrift IDL to expand connector specific fields. `#25474 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25474>`_

Router Changes
______________
* Add the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_
* Replace the parameters in router schedulers to use `RouterRequestInfo` to get the URL destination. `#25244 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25244>`_
* Update router UI to eliminate vulnerabilities. `#25206 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25206>`_

Security Changes
________________
* Add authorization support for ``SHOW CREATE TABLE``, ``SHOW CREATE VIEW``, ``SHOW COLUMNS``, and ``DESCRIBE`` queries. `#25364 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25364>`_
* Upgrade commons-beanutils dependency to address `CVE-2025-48734 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wxr5-93ph-8wr9>`_. `#25235 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25235>`_

> * Upgrade commons-lang3 to 3.18.0 to address `CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>_`. `#25549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25549>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade commons-lang3 to 3.18.0 to address `CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>`_. `#25549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25549>`_
```
Fix broken link.
`CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>`_.

> * Upgrade kafka to 3.9.1 in response to `CVE-2025-27817 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vgq5-3255-v292>`_. :pr:`25312`. `#25312 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25312>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade kafka to 3.9.1 in response to `CVE-2025-27817 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vgq5-3255-v292>`_. `#25312 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25312>`_
```

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________
* Fix issue introduced in `#25127 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25127>`_ by introducing `TableLocationProvider` interface to decouple table location logic from JDBC configuration. `#25582 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25582>`_
* Improve type mapping API to add WriteMapping functionality. `#25437 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25437>`_
* Add mixed case support related catalog property in JDBC connector ``case-sensitive-name-matching``. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add case-sensitive support for column names. It can be enabled for JDBC based connector by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` at the catalog level. `#24983 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24983>`_

Arrow Flight Connector Changes
______________________________

> * Added support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. See :ref:`connector/base-arrow-flight:Configuration`. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. See :ref:`connector/base-arrow-flight:Configuration`. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_
```

Delta Lake Connector Changes
____________________________
* Improve mapping of ``TIMESTAMP`` column type by changing it from Presto  ``TIMESTAMP`` type to ``TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE``. `#24418 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24418>`_
* Add support for ``TIMESTAMP_NTZ`` column type as Presto ``TIMESTAMP`` type. ``legacy_timestamp`` should be set to ``false`` to match delta type specifications. When set to ``false``, ``TIMESTAMP`` will not adjust based on local timezone. `#24418 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24418>`_

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix an issue while accessing Symlink tables. `#25307 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25307>`_

> * Fix incorrectly ignoring computed table statistics in `ANALYZE`. `#24973 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24973>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix incorrectly ignoring computed table statistics in ``ANALYZE``. `#24973 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24973>`_
```

* Improve split generation and read throughput for Symlink Tables. `#25277 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25277>`_
* Add support for symlink files in :ref:`connector/hive:Quick Stats`. `#25250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25250>`_

> * Update default value of `hive.copy-on-first-write-configuration-enabled` to false (:issue:`25404`). `#25420 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25420>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Update default value of ``hive.copy-on-first-write-configuration-enabled`` to ``false``. `#25420 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25420>`_
```

* Add pushdownSubfieldArgIndex parameter to ComplexTypeFunctionDescriptor for subfield optimization during query planning. `#25175 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25175>`_
* Add xxhash64 override with seed argument. `#25521 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25521>`_
* Adds aggregation tests from ``presto-tests`` to run with native query runner in ``presto-native-tests``. `#24809 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24809>`_
* Move UnnestNode to SPI, make it available in collector optimizer. `#25317 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25317>`_
* Update ProtocolToThrift files to be generated for cpp thrift serde. `#25162 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25162>`_

Prestissimo (Native Execution) Changes
______________________________________
* Fix Native Plan Checker for CTAS and Insert queries. `#25115 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25115>`_
* Fix native session property manager reading plugin configs from file. `#25553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25553>`_

> * Fix native session property manager reading plugin configs from file. `#25553 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25553>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Fix PrestoExchangeSource 400 Bad Request by adding the "Host" header. `#25272 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25272>`_

> * Improve memory usage in PartitionAndSerialize Operator by pre-determine the serialized byte size of a given sort key at 'rowId'. This allows PartitionAndSerialize Operator to pre-allocated the exact output buffer size needed for serialization, avoid wasted memory allocation. User should expect lower memory usage and up to 20% runtime increase when serializing a sort key. `#25393 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25393>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve memory usage in PartitionAndSerialize Operator by pre-determining the serialized byte size of a given sort key at ``rowId``. This allows the PartitionAndSerialize Operator to pre-allocate the exact output buffer size needed for serialization and avoid wasted memory allocation. User should expect lower memory usage and up to 20% runtime increase when serializing a sort key. `#25393 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25393>`_
```

* Improve serialized size estimation by introducing a batched API using vectorized operations. It delivers up to 8x faster size estimation compared to the previous row-by-row implementation. Workloads with high serialization cost will benefit from adopting this range-based API. `#25569 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25569>`_

> * Add BinarySortableSerializer::serializedSizeInBytes method that returns the serialized byte size of a given input row at 'rowId'. This allows us to pre-allocated the exact output buffer size needed for serialization, avoiding wasted memory space. `#25359 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25359>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add BinarySortableSerializer::serializedSizeInBytes method that returns the serialized byte size of a given input row at ``rowId``. This allows us to pre-allocate the exact output buffer size needed for serialization, avoiding wasted memory space. `#25359 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25359>`_
```

* Add geometry type to the list of supported types in NativeTypeManager. `#25560 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25560>`_
* Add sidecar in presto-native-tests module. `#25174 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25174>`_

> * Replace `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` with `EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Replace ``EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)`` with ``EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)`` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_
```

* Update thrift IDL to expand connector specific fields. `#25474 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25474>`_

Router Changes
______________

> * Add a new custom router scheduler plugin, the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_
```

* Replace the parameters in router schedulers to use `RouterRequestInfo` to get the URL destination. `#25244 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25244>`_
* Update router UI to eliminate vulnerabilities. `#25206 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25206>`_

Security Changes
________________

> * Add authorization support for `SHOW CREATE TABLE`, `SHOW CREATE VIEW`, `SHOW COLUMNS`, and `DESCRIBE` queries. `#25364 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25364>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add authorization support for ``SHOW CREATE TABLE``, ``SHOW CREATE VIEW``, ``SHOW COLUMNS``, and ``DESCRIBE`` queries. `#25364 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25364>`_
```

> * Upgrade commons-beanutils dependency to address 'CVE-2025-48734  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wxr5-93ph-8wr9>'. `#25235 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25235>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade commons-beanutils dependency to address `CVE-2025-48734 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wxr5-93ph-8wr9>`_. `#25235 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25235>`_
```

> * Upgrade commons-lang3 to 3.18.0 to address `CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>`. `#25549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25549>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade commons-lang3 to 3.18.0 to address `CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>_`. `#25549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25549>`_
```

* Upgrade kafka to 3.9.1 in response to `CVE-2025-27817 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vgq5-3255-v292>`_. :pr:`25312`. `#25312 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25312>`_

JDBC Driver Changes
___________________
* Fix issue introduced in `#25127 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25127>`_ by introducing `TableLocationProvider` interface to decouple table location logic from JDBC configuration. `#25582 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25582>`_
* Improve type mapping API to add WriteMapping functionality. `#25437 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25437>`_

> * Improve type mapping API to add WriteMapping functionality. `#25124 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25124>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Add mixed case support related catalog property in JDBC connector ``case-sensitive-name-matching``. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add case-sensitive support for column names. It can be enabled for JDBC based connector by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` at the catalog level. `#24983 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24983>`_

Arrow Flight Connector Changes
______________________________

> * Added support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. See :ref:`connector/base-arrow-flight:Configuration`. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_
```

* Add support for ``$delete_file_path`` metadata column. `#25280 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25280>`_
* Add support for ``$deleted`` metadata column. `#25280 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25280>`_
* Add support of ``rename view`` for Iceberg connector when configured with ``REST`` and ``NESSIE``. `#25202 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25202>`_
* Deprecate ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-enabled`` configuration property and ``delete_as_join_rewrite_enabled`` session property. Use ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-max-delete-columns`` instead. `#25462 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25462>`_

MySQL Connector Changes
_______________________
* Add support for mixed-case in MySQL. It can be enabled by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` configuration in the catalog configuration. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_

Redshift Connector Changes
__________________________

> * Fix Redshift VARBYTE column handling for JDBC driver version 2.1.0.32+ by mapping jdbcType=1111 and jdbcTypeName="binary varying" to Presto's VARBINARY type. `#25488 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25488>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix Redshift ``VARBYTE`` column handling for JDBC driver version 2.1.0.32+ by mapping ``jdbcType=1111`` and ``jdbcTypeName="binary varying"`` to Presto's ``VARBINARY`` type. `#25488 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25488>`_
```

> * Fix Redshift connector runtime failure due to missing dependency on ``com.amazonaws.util.StringUtils``. Add ``aws-java-sdk-core`` as a runtime dependency to support Redshift JDBC driver (v2.1.0.32) which relies on this class for metadata operations. `#25265 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25265>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix Redshift connector runtime failure due to a missing dependency on ``com.amazonaws.util.StringUtils``. Add ``aws-java-sdk-core`` as a runtime dependency to support Redshift JDBC driver (v2.1.0.32) which relies on this class for metadata operations. `#25265 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25265>`_
```

* Add mixed case support for schema and table names. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add property ``native_query_memory_reclaimer_priority``  which controls which queries are killed first when a worker is running low on memory. Higher value means lower priority to be consistent with velox memory reclaimer's convention. `#25325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25325>`_
* Add pushdownSubfieldArgIndex parameter to ComplexTypeFunctionDescriptor for subfield optimization during query planning. `#25175 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25175>`_
* Add xxhash64 override with seed argument. `#25521 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25521>`_
* Adds aggregation tests from ``presto-tests`` to run with native query runner in ``presto-native-tests``. `#24809 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24809>`_
* Move UnnestNode to SPI, make it available in collector optimizer. `#25317 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25317>`_
* Update ProtocolToThrift files to be generated for cpp thrift serde. `#25162 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25162>`_

> * QueryPlanner only includes the optional ``$row_id`` column in :ref:`sql/delete:DELETE` query output variables when it is actually used by the connector. `#25284 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25284>`_

Reviewer 2: done

* Improve serialized size estimation by introducing a batched API using vectorized operations. It delivers up to 8x faster size estimation compared to the previous row-by-row implementation. Workloads with high serialization cost will benefit from adopting this range-based API. `#25569 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25569>`_
* Add BinarySortableSerializer::serializedSizeInBytes method that returns the serialized byte size of a given input row at ``rowId``. This allows us to pre-allocate the exact output buffer size needed for serialization, avoiding wasted memory space. `#25359 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25359>`_
* Add geometry type to the list of supported types in NativeTypeManager. `#25560 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25560>`_
* Add sidecar in presto-native-tests module. `#25174 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25174>`_
* Replace ``EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)`` with ``EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)`` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_
* Update thrift IDL to expand connector specific fields. `#25474 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25474>`_

> * Report number of drivers and splits separately in stats API and Presto UI. `#24671 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24671>`_

Reviewer 2: fixed

* Add a function to Constraint to return the input arguments for the predicate. `#25248 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25248>`_
* Add a new optimization `MinMaxByToWindowFunction` to rewrite min_by/max_by aggregations with row_number window function. `#25190 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25190>`_
* Add ``broadcast_semi_join_for_delete`` session property to disable the ReplicateSemiJoinInDelete optimizer. `#25256 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25256>`_
* Add ``history_based_optimizer_estimate_size_using_variables`` session property to have HBO estimate plan node output size using individual variables. `#25400 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25400>`_
* Add an optimizer to add distinct aggregation on build side of semi join. `#25238 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25238>`_

> * Add case-sensitive support for column names. It can be enabled for JDBC based connector by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` at the catalog level. `#24983 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24983>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Move to JDBC Driver Changes

* Improve serialized size estimation by introducing a batched API using vectorized operations. It delivers up to 8x faster size estimation compared to the previous row-by-row implementation. Workloads with high serialization cost will benefit from adopting this range-based API. `#25569 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25569>`_
* Add BinarySortableSerializer::serializedSizeInBytes method that returns the serialized byte size of a given input row at 'rowId'. This allows us to pre-allocated the exact output buffer size needed for serialization, avoiding wasted memory space. `#25359 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25359>`_
* Add geometry type to the list of supported types in NativeTypeManager. `#25560 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25560>`_
* Add sidecar in presto-native-tests module. `#25174 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25174>`_
* Replace `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` with `EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_
* Update thrift IDL to expand connector specific fields. `#25474 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25474>`_

> Security Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Router Changes
______________
* Add a new custom router scheduler plugin, the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_
* Replace the parameters in router schedulers to use `RouterRequestInfo` to get the URL destination. `#25244 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25244>`_
* Update router UI to eliminate vulnerabilities. `#25206 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25206>`_

Security Changes
```
Move Router Changes to correct location. See [Order of sections](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-sections) in the Release Notes Guidelines.

________________
* Add authorization support for `SHOW CREATE TABLE`, `SHOW CREATE VIEW`, `SHOW COLUMNS`, and `DESCRIBE` queries. `#25364 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25364>`_
* Upgrade commons-beanutils dependency to address 'CVE-2025-48734  <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-wxr5-93ph-8wr9>'. `#25235 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25235>`_
* Upgrade commons-lang3 to 3.18.0 to address `CVE-2025-48924 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j288-q9x7-2f5v>`. `#25549 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25549>`_
* Upgrade kafka to 3.9.1 in response to `CVE-2025-27817 <https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-vgq5-3255-v292>`_. :pr:`25312`. `#25312 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25312>`_

JDBC Driver Changes

> ___________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
___________________
* Fix issue introduced in `#25127 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25127>`_ by introducing `TableLocationProvider` interface to decouple table location logic from JDBC configuration. `#25582 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25582>`_
```

* Improve type mapping API to add WriteMapping functionality. `#25437 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25437>`_
* Improve type mapping API to add WriteMapping functionality. `#25124 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25124>`_

> * Add mixed case support related catalog property in JDBC connector ``case-sensitive-name-matching``. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add mixed case support related catalog property in JDBC connector ``case-sensitive-name-matching``. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add case-sensitive support for column names. It can be enabled for JDBC based connector by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` at the catalog level. `#24983 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24983>`_
```

> Delta Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arrow Flight Connector Changes
______________________________
* Added support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_

Delta Lake Connector Changes
```
Move entry heading for Arrow, and correct Delta Connector Changes.

_______________________
* Improve mapping of ``TIMESTAMP`` column type by changing it from Presto  ``TIMESTAMP`` type to ``TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE``. `#24418 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24418>`_

> * Add support for ``TIMESTAMP_NTZ`` column type as Presto ``TIMESTAMP`` type. ``legacy_timestamp`` should be set to ``false`` to match delta type specifications. With it set, ``TIMESTAMP`` will not adjust based on local timezone. `#24418 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24418>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``TIMESTAMP_NTZ`` column type as Presto ``TIMESTAMP`` type. ``legacy_timestamp`` should be set to ``false`` to match delta type specifications. When set to ``false``, ``TIMESTAMP`` will not adjust based on local timezone. `#24418 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24418>`_
```

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix an issue while accessing Symlink tables. `#25307 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25307>`_
* Fix incorrectly ignoring computed table statistics in `ANALYZE`. `#24973 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24973>`_
* Improve split generation and read throughput for Symlink Tables. `#25277 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25277>`_
* Add support for symlink files in :ref:`connector/hive:Quick Stats`. `#25250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25250>`_
* Update default value of `hive.copy-on-first-write-configuration-enabled` to false (:issue:`25404`). `#25420 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25420>`_

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________
* Fix error querying ``$data_sequence_number`` metadata column for table with equality deletes. `#25293 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25293>`_

> * Fix the remove_orphan_files procedure after deletion operations. `#25220 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25220>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix the :ref:`connector/iceberg:Remove Orphan Files` procedure after deletion operations. `#25220 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25220>`_
```

> * Add ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-max-delete-columns`` configuration property and ``delete_as_join_rewrite_max_delete_columns`` session property to control when equality delete as join optimization is applied. The optimization is now only applied when the number of equality delete columns is less than or equal to this threshold (default: 400). Setting this to 0 disables the optimization. See :doc:`/connector/iceberg` for details. `#25462 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25462>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-max-delete-columns`` configuration property and ``delete_as_join_rewrite_max_delete_columns`` session property to control when equality delete as join optimization is applied. The optimization is now only applied when the number of equality delete columns is less than or equal to this threshold (default: 400). Set to 0 to disable the optimization. See :doc:`/connector/iceberg`. `#25462 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25462>`_
```

* Add support for ``$delete_file_path`` metadata column. `#25280 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25280>`_
* Add support for ``$deleted`` metadata column. `#25280 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25280>`_
* Add support of ``rename view`` for Iceberg connector when configured with ``REST`` and ``NESSIE``. `#25202 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25202>`_
* Deprecate ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-enabled`` configuration property and ``delete_as_join_rewrite_enabled`` session property. Use ``iceberg.delete-as-join-rewrite-max-delete-columns`` instead. `#25462 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25462>`_

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> JDBC Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ______________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Fixes issue introduced in #25127 by introducing `TableLocationProvider` interface to decouple table location logic from JDBC configuration. `#25582 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25582>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Move to JDBC Driver Changes.

> Mysql Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL Connector Changes
```

_______________________
* Add support for mixed-case in MySQL. It can be enabled by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` configuration in the catalog configuration. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_

Redshift Connector Changes
__________________________
* Fix Redshift VARBYTE column handling for JDBC driver version 2.1.0.32+ by mapping jdbcType=1111 and jdbcTypeName="binary varying" to Presto's VARBINARY type. `#25488 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25488>`_
* Fix Redshift connector runtime failure due to missing dependency on ``com.amazonaws.util.StringUtils``. Add ``aws-java-sdk-core`` as a runtime dependency to support Redshift JDBC driver (v2.1.0.32) which relies on this class for metadata operations. `#25265 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25265>`_

Documentation Changes
_____________________
* Add :ref:`connector/hive:Avro Configuration Properties` to Hive Connector documentation. `#25311 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25311>`_

> * Add doc for hive.copy-on-first-write-configuration-enabled in  presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/hive.rst. `#25443 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25443>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add documentation for ``hive.copy-on-first-write-configuration-enabled`` configuration property to :ref:`connector/hive:Hive Configuration Properties`. `#25443 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25443>`_
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Arrow Flight Connector Template Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _______________________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Added support for mTLS authentication in Arrow Flight client. `#25179 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25179>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Move heading.

> Router Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ______________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Add a new custom router scheduler plugin, the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Add a new custom router scheduler plugin, the `Presto Plan Checker Router Scheduler Plugin <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/tree/master/presto-plan-checker-router-plugin/README.md>`_. `#25035 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25035>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Replace the parameters in router schedulers to use `RouterRequestInfo` to get the URL destination. `#25244 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25244>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Update router UI to eliminate vulnerabilities. `#25206 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25206>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Replace the parameters in router schedulers to use `RouterRequestInfo` to get the URL destination. `#25244 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25244>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Update router UI to eliminate vulnerabilities. `#25206 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25206>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=============
Release 0.294
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Improve efficiency of output buffer implementation to reduce memory usage in writer. `#24913 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24913>`_
* Improve query resource usage by enabling subfield pushdown for :func:`map_filter` when selected keys are constants. `#25451 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25451>`_
* Improve query resource usage by enabling subfield pushdown for :func:`map_subset` when the input array is a constant array. `#25394 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25394>`_

> * Improve serialized size estimation by introducing a batched API using vectorized operations. It delivers up to 8x faster size estimation compared to the previous row-by-row implementation. Workloads with high serialization cost will benefit from adopting this range-based API. `#25569 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25569>`_

Reviewer 2: how about?
```
Improve the efficiency of queries that involve with serialization operator by processing data in large group instead of one by one.
```

* Add an optimizer to add distinct aggregation on build side of semi join. `#25238 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25238>`_
* Add changes to populate data source metadata to support combined lineage tracking. `#25127 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25127>`_
* Add mixed case support for schema and table names. `#24551 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24551>`_
* Add property ``native_query_memory_reclaimer_priority``  which controls which queries are killed first when a worker is running low on memory. Higher value means lower priority to be consistent with velox memory reclaimer's convention. `#25325 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25325>`_
* Add pushdownSubfieldArgIndex parameter to ComplexTypeFunctionDescriptor for subfield optimization during query planning. `#25175 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25175>`_
* Add case-sensitive support for column names. It can be enabled for JDBC based connector by setting ``case-sensitive-name-matching=true`` at the catalog level. `#24983 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24983>`_

> * Replace ``EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)`` with ``EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)`` for faster, lightweight analysis. `#25545 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25545>`_

Reviewer 2: I am not sure about this one, I thought this speeds up the `explain` query. not sure about router.
